Once a famous British Politician named Benjamin Disraeli said, “There can be an economy only where there is efficiency”. As utility is what decides value and value is what drives an economy, it’s simple to deduce that efficiency in economics is all about being able to produce greater quantities of goods , and to do that with minimal resources. So, when there is this question that when an entity possesses absolute advantage over the production of certain goods in comparison with some other entity can a trade still exist between them, Richardo was able to see something that could motivate a trade in this situation which is opportunity cost. 

An opportunity cost is something that needs to be given up to acquire something else. It is what decides what to trade and what not to. For instance, let’s picturise a hypothetical situation wherein two countries one, country A, capable of producing either 1000 tanks of gasoline or 500 gold biscuits in an hour and the other, country B, capable of producing 100 tanks of gasoline or 200 gold biscuits in the same hours time. 

Clearly, country A has an absolute advantage over productions of either gasoline or gold biscuits compared to country B. However, there is still something that country A can do to enhance their economic prosperity which also enhances the economic status of country B. In case of a domestic trade, country A can have a maximum production of 1000 units, (that of gasoline), in an hour. While country B will have a maximum of 200 units, ( that of gold), in the same hour. Here the opportunity cost of producing a tank of gasoline is 2 gold biscuits to country B while it is just 0.5 gold biscuit to country A. Putting this in simple words, country A has less to lose compared to country B in producing the gasoline. Conversely, country B can produce gold biscuits at a cheaper opportunity cost compared to country A. This is what is termed as comparative advantage. In this case, country A has comparative advantage in production of gasoline while country B has comparative advantage in producing gold biscuits. So now when both these countries agree to exchange those goods whose production they are specialised in at a certain opportunity cost they could save significant amounts of labour time and still produce units larger than before. The countries here are clearly more efficient economies after the trade than before. 

When a similar explanation was given by Daniel Richardo in Principles of Political Economy and Taxation (1817), economists and business persons started to look at trade differently. Choosing what to import and what to export on the basis of comparative advantage, as opposed to absolute advantage, opened more doors into economic prosperity and international trades than ever. The bilateral trade between India and the UK is an embodiment of this fact. Tonnes of goods and services worth billions of sterlings(British currency) have been flowing and flying between India and the UK since 2000. This trade pertains to the exports of gems, jewellery, medicaments, footwear, turbojets, parts of space crafts to the UK from India and the imports of gold, silver, diamonds, petroleum coke etc to India from the UK,(McCole , Panjwani, 2018). But what does all of this have to do with comparative advantage? Well, it is what facilitated this trade in the first place. 

India’s traditional medical foundations in ayurveda, Unani and Siddha fields, has created a lot of skilled medicine practitioners and a whole lot more productivity in the pharmaceuticals. This turned medicaments into a comparative advantage to the Indians and tempted imports into a country like the UK struggling from higher opportunity costs of production, (CATR, (Centre for Advance Trade Research), 2019). 

On the other hand, the UK due to lesser demand for materials like gold, silver, diamonds and lesser competition in their production has got cheaper ways to extract these materials and produce as compared to a country like India where many competitors are just squeezing out the limited resources to meet the demands of jewellery-fanatic-Indians. So this low opportunity cost that the UK has in producing gold, silver, diamonds when compared to India is what entitled India to import from the UK, (CATR, (Centre for Advance Trade Research), 2019). 


The benefits of this trade, to India, have been set out clearly when the GDP growth of India at 1.7 Trillion Sterling projected to 7.1% in the government’s fiscal year(2016-2017), (Lynch,2019). To the UK, the trade benefits were seen coming when the UK got into India’s top 3 cross-border shopping destinations and was able to attract 6% Indian online shoppers who spent 6.9 billion sterling into online shopping, (Lynch,2019). This way due to comparative advantages the UK has in whisky(constituting 80% of the UK’s exports), spare parts of large motor vehicles, air-craft, helicopter parts, tourism, education and due to comparative advantages India has in IT sector, film Industry, Audio-visual services like gaming, broadcasting, both the countries have had a lucrative trade of goods and services so far with a great potential in further trade expansions, (McCole ,Panjwani, 2018).

